‘The island of Utopia is in the middle two hundred
miles broad, and holds almost at the same breadth over a
great part of it, but it grows narrower towards both ends.
Its figure is not unlike a crescent. Between its horns the
sea comes in eleven miles broad, and spreads itself into a
great bay, which is environed with land to the compass of
about five hundred miles, and is well secured from winds.
In this bay there is no great current; the whole coast is, as
it were, one continued harbour, which gives all that live in
the island great convenience for mutual commerce. But
the entry into the bay, occasioned by rocks on the one
hand and shallows on the other, is very dangerous. In the
middle of it there is one single rock which appears above
water, and may, therefore, easily be avoided; and on the
top of it there is a tower, in which a garrison is kept; the
other rocks lie under water, and are very dangerous. The
channel is known only to the natives; so that if any
stranger should enter into the bay without one of their
pilots he would run great danger of shipwreck. For even
they themselves could not pass it safe if some marks that
are on the coast did not direct their way; and if these
should be but a little shifted, any fleet that might come
against them, how great soever it were, would be certainly
lost. On the other side of the island there are likewise
many harbours; and the coast is so fortified, both by nature
and art, that a small number of men can hinder the descent
of a great army. But they report (and there remains good
marks of it to make it credible) that this was no island at
first, but a part of the continent. Utopus, that conquered it
(whose name it still carries, for Abraxa was its first name),
brought the rude and uncivilised inhabitants into such a
good government, and to that measure of politeness, that
they now far excel all the rest of mankind. Having soon
subdued them, he designed to separate them from the
continent, and to bring the sea quite round them. To
accomplish this he ordered a deep channel to be dug,
fifteen miles long; and that the natives might not think he
treated them like slaves, he not only forced the inhabitants,
but also his own soldiers, to labour in carrying it on. As he
set a vast number of men to work, he, beyond all men’s
expectations, brought it to a speedy conclusion. And his
neighbours, who at first laughed at the folly of the
undertaking, no sooner saw it brought to perfection than
they were struck with admiration and terror.
‘There are fifty-four cities in the island, all large and
well built, the manners, customs, and laws of which are
the same, and they are all contrived as near in the same
manner as the ground on which they stand will allow. The
nearest lie at least twenty-four miles’ distance from one
another, and the most remote are not so far distant but
that a man can go on foot in one day from it to that which
lies next it. Every city sends three of their wisest senators
once a year to Amaurot, to consult about their common
concerns; for that is the chief town of the island, being 
situated near the centre of it, so that it is the most
convenient place for their assemblies. The jurisdiction of
every city extends at least twenty miles, and, where the
towns lie wider, they have much more ground. No town
desires to enlarge its bounds, for the people consider
themselves rather as tenants than landlords. They have
built, over all the country, farmhouses for husbandmen,
which are well contrived, and furnished with all things
necessary for country labour. Inhabitants are sent, by turns,
from the cities to dwell in them; no country family has
fewer than forty men and women in it, besides two slaves.
There is a master and a mistress set over every family, and
over thirty families there is a magistrate. Every year twenty
of this family come back to the town after they have
stayed two years in the country, and in their room there
are other twenty sent from the town, that they may learn
country work from those that have been already one year
in the country, as they must teach those that come to
them the next from the town. By this means such as dwell
in those country farms are never ignorant of agriculture,
and so commit no errors which might otherwise be fatal
and bring them under a scarcity of corn. But though there
is every year such a shifting of the husbandmen to prevent
any man being forced against his will to follow that hard
course of life too long, yet many among them take such
pleasure in it that they desire leave to continue in it many
years. These husbandmen till the ground, breed cattle,
hew wood, and convey it to the towns either by land or
water, as is most convenient. They breed an infinite
multitude of chickens in a very curious manner; for the
hens do not sit and hatch them, but a vast number of eggs
are laid in a gentle and equal heat in order to be hatched,
and they are no sooner out of the shell, and able to stir
about, but they seem to consider those that feed them as
their mothers, and follow them as other chickens do the
hen that hatched them. They breed very few horses, but
those they have are full of mettle, and are kept only for
exercising their youth in the art of sitting and riding them;
for they do not put them to any work, either of ploughing
or carriage, in which they employ oxen. For though their
horses are stronger, yet they find oxen can hold out
longer; and as they are not subject to so many diseases, so
they are kept upon a less charge and with less trouble. And
even when they are so worn out that they are no more fit
for labour, they are good meat at last. They sow no corn
but that which is to be their bread; for they drink either
wine, cider or perry, and often water, sometimes boiled
with honey or liquorice, with which they abound; and
though they know exactly how much corn will serve
every town and all that tract of country which belongs to
it, yet they sow much more and breed more cattle than are
necessary for their consumption, and they give that
overplus of which they make no use to their neighbours.
When they want anything in the country which it does
not produce, they fetch that from the town, without
carrying anything in exchange for it. And the magistrates
of the town take care to see it given them; for they meet
generally in the town once a month, upon a festival day.
When the time of harvest comes, the magistrates in the
country send to those in the towns and let them know
how many hands they will need for reaping the harvest;
and the number they call for being sent to them, they
commonly despatch it all in one day. 