
‘These and such like notions have that people imbibed,
partly from their education, being bred in a country whose
customs and laws are opposite to all such foolish maxims,
and partly from their learning and studies—for though
there are but few in any town that are so wholly excused
from labour as to give themselves entirely up to their
studies (these being only such persons as discover from
their childhood an extraordinary capacity and disposition
for letters), yet their children and a great part of the
nation, both men and women, are taught to spend those
hours in which they are not obliged to work in reading;
and this they do through the whole progress of life. They
have all their learning in their own tongue, which is both
a copious and pleasant language, and in which a man can
fully express his mind; it runs over a great tract of many
countries, but it is not equally pure in all places. They had
never so much as heard of the names of any of those
philosophers that are so famous in these parts of the world,
before we went among them; and yet they had made the
same discoveries as the Greeks, both in music, logic,
arithmetic, and geometry. But as they are almost ineverything equal to the ancient philosophers, so they far
exceed our modern logicians for they have never yet fallen
upon the barbarous niceties that our youth are forced to
learn in those trifling logical schools that are among us.
They are so far from minding chimeras and fantastical
images made in the mind that none of them could
comprehend what we meant when we talked to them of a
man in the abstract as common to all men in particular (so
that though we spoke of him as a thing that we could
point at with our fingers, yet none of them could perceive
him) and yet distinct from every one, as if he were some
monstrous Colossus or giant; yet, for all this ignorance of
these empty notions, they knew astronomy, and were
perfectly acquainted with the motions of the heavenly
bodies; and have many instruments, well contrived and
divided, by which they very accurately compute the
course and positions of the sun, moon, and stars. But for
the cheat of divining by the stars, by their oppositions or
conjunctions, it has not so much as entered into their
thoughts. They have a particular sagacity, founded upon
much observation, in judging of the weather, by which
they know when they may look for rain, wind, or other
alterations in the air; but as to the philosophy of these
things, the cause of the saltness of the sea, of its ebbing andflowing, and of the original and nature both of the
heavens and the earth, they dispute of them partly as our
ancient philosophers have done, and partly upon some
new hypothesis, in which, as they differ from them, so
they do not in all things agree among themselves.
‘As to moral philosophy, they have the same disputes
among them as we have here. They examine what are
properly good, both for the body and the mind; and
whether any outward thing can be called truly GOOD, or
if that term belong only to the endowments of the soul.
They inquire, likewise, into the nature of virtue and
pleasure. But their chief dispute is concerning the
happiness of a man, and wherein it consists—whether in
some one thing or in a great many. They seem, indeed,
more inclinable to that opinion that places, if not the
whole, yet the chief part, of a man’s happiness in pleasure;
and, what may seem more strange, they make use of
arguments even from religion, notwithstanding its severity
and roughness, for the support of that opinion so
indulgent to pleasure; for they never dispute concerning
happiness without fetching some arguments from the
principles of religion as well as from natural reason, since
without the former they reckon that all our inquiries after
happiness must be but conjectural and defective. ‘These are their religious principles:- That the soul of
man is immortal, and that God of His goodness has
designed that it should be happy; and that He has,
therefore, appointed rewards for good and virtuous
actions, and punishments for vice, to be distributed after
this life. Though these principles of religion are conveyed
down among them by tradition, they think that even
reason itself determines a man to believe and acknowledge
them; and freely confess that if these were taken away, no
man would be so insensible as not to seek after pleasure by
all possible means, lawful or unlawful, using only this
caution—that a lesser pleasure might not stand in the way
of a greater, and that no pleasure ought to be pursued that
should draw a great deal of pain after it; for they think it
the maddest thing in the world to pursue virtue, that is a
sour and difficult thing, and not only to renounce the
pleasures of life, but willingly to undergo much pain and
trouble, if a man has no prospect of a reward. And what
reward can there be for one that has passed his whole life,
not only without pleasure, but in pain, if there is nothing
to be expected after death? Yet they do not place
happiness in all sorts of pleasures, but only in those that in
themselves are good and honest. There is a party among
them who place happiness in bare virtue; others think that our natures are conducted by virtue to happiness, as that
which is the chief good of man. They define virtue thus—
that it is a living according to Nature, and think that we
are made by God for that end; they believe that a man
then follows the dictates of Nature when he pursues or
avoids things according to the direction of reason. They
say that the first dictate of reason is the kindling in us a
love and reverence for the Divine Majesty, to whom we
owe both all that we have and, all that we can ever hope
for. In the next place, reason directs us to keep our minds
as free from passion and as cheerful as we can, and that we
should consider ourselves as bound by the ties of goodnature
and humanity to use our utmost endeavours to help
forward the happiness of all other persons; for there never
was any man such a morose and severe pursuer of virtue,
such an enemy to pleasure, that though he set hard rules
for men to undergo, much pain, many watchings, and
other rigors, yet did not at the same time advise them to
do all they could in order to relieve and ease the
miserable, and who did not represent gentleness and goodnature
as amiable dispositions. And from thence they infer
that if a man ought to advance the welfare and comfort of
the rest of mankind (there being no virtue more proper
and peculiar to our nature than to ease the miseries of others, to free from trouble and anxiety, in furnishing
them with the comforts of life, in which pleasure consists)
Nature much more vigorously leads them to do all this for
himself. A life of pleasure is either a real evil, and in that
case we ought not to assist others in their pursuit of it, but,
on the contrary, to keep them from it all we can, as from
that which is most hurtful and deadly; or if it is a good
thing, so that we not only may but ought to help others to
it, why, then, ought not a man to begin with himself?
since no man can be more bound to look after the good of
another than after his own; for Nature cannot direct us to
be good and kind to others, and yet at the same time to be
unmerciful and cruel to ourselves. Thus as they define
virtue to be living according to Nature, so they imagine
that Nature prompts all people on to seek after pleasure as
the end of all they do. They also observe that in order to
our supporting the pleasures of life, Nature inclines us to
enter into society; for there is no man so much raised
above the rest of mankind as to be the only favourite of
Nature, who, on the contrary, seems to have placed on a
level all those that belong to the same species. Upon this
they infer that no man ought to seek his own
conveniences so eagerly as to prejudice others; and
therefore they think that not only all agreements between private persons ought to be observed, but likewise that all
those laws ought to be kept which either a good prince
has published in due form, or to which a people that is
neither oppressed with tyranny nor circumvented by fraud
has consented, for distributing those conveniences of life
which afford us all our pleasures.
‘They think it is an evidence of true wisdom for a man
to pursue his own advantage as far as the laws allow it,
they account it piety to prefer the public good to one’s
private concerns, but they think it unjust for a man to seek
for pleasure by snatching another man’s pleasures from
him; and, on the contrary, they think it a sign of a gentle
and good soul for a man to dispense with his own
advantage for the good of others, and that by this means a
good man finds as much pleasure one way as he parts with
another; for as he may expect the like from others when
he may come to need it, so, if that should fail him, yet the
sense of a good action, and the reflections that he makes
on the love and gratitude of those whom he has so
obliged, gives the mind more pleasure than the body could
have found in that from which it had restrained itself.
They are also persuaded that God will make up the loss of
those small pleasures with a vast and endless joy, of which
religion easily convinces a good soul. ‘Thus, upon an inquiry into the whole matter, they
reckon that all our actions, and even all our virtues,
terminate in pleasure, as in our chief end and greatest
happiness; and they call every motion or state, either of
body or mind, in which Nature teaches us to delight, a
pleasure. Thus they cautiously limit pleasure only to those
appetites to which Nature leads us; for they say that
Nature leads us only to those delights to which reason, as
well as sense, carries us, and by which we neither injure
any other person nor lose the possession of greater
pleasures, and of such as draw no troubles after them. But
they look upon those delights which men by a foolish,
though common, mistake call pleasure, as if they could
change as easily the nature of things as the use of words, as
things that greatly obstruct their real happiness, instead of
advancing it, because they so entirely possess the minds of
those that are once captivated by them with a false notion
of pleasure that there is no room left for pleasures of a
truer or purer kind.
‘There are many things that in themselves have nothing
that is truly delightful; on the contrary, they have a good
deal of bitterness in them; and yet, from our perverse
appetites after forbidden objects, are not only ranked
among the pleasures, but are made even the greatestdesigns, of life. Among those who pursue these
sophisticated pleasures they reckon such as I mentioned
before, who think themselves really the better for having
fine clothes; in which they think they are doubly
mistaken, both in the opinion they have of their clothes,
and in that they have of themselves. For if you consider
the use of clothes, why should a fine thread be thought
better than a coarse one? And yet these men, as if they had
some real advantages beyond others, and did not owe
them wholly to their mistakes, look big, seem to fancy
themselves to be more valuable, and imagine that a respect
is due to them for the sake of a rich garment, to which
they would not have pretended if they had been more
meanly clothed, and even resent it as an affront if that
respect is not paid them. It is also a great folly to be taken
with outward marks of respect, which signify nothing; for
what true or real pleasure can one man find in another’s
standing bare or making legs to him? Will the bending
another man’s knees give ease to yours? and will the head’s
being bare cure the madness of yours? And yet it is
wonderful to see how this false notion of pleasure
bewitches many who delight themselves with the fancy of
their nobility, and are pleased with this conceit—that they
are descended from ancestors who have been held for some successions rich, and who have had great possessions;
for this is all that makes nobility at present. Yet they do
not think themselves a whit the less noble, though their
immediate parents have left none of this wealth to them,
or though they themselves have squandered it away. The
Utopians have no better opinion of those who are much
taken with gems and precious stones, and who account it a
degree of happiness next to a divine one if they can
purchase one that is very extraordinary, especially if it be
of that sort of stones that is then in greatest request, for the
same sort is not at all times universally of the same value,
nor will men buy it unless it be dismounted and taken out
of the gold. The jeweller is then made to give good
security, and required solemnly to swear that the stone is
true, that, by such an exact caution, a false one might not
be bought instead of a true; though, if you were to
examine it, your eye could find no difference between the
counterfeit and that which is true; so that they are all one
to you, as much as if you were blind. Or can it be thought
that they who heap up a useless mass of wealth, not for
any use that it is to bring them, but merely to please
themselves with the contemplation of it, enjoy any true
pleasure in it? The delight they find is only a false shadow
of joy. Those are no better whose error is somewhat different from the former, and who hide it out of their fear
of losing it; for what other name can fit the hiding it in the
earth, or, rather, the restoring it to it again, it being thus
cut off from being useful either to its owner or to the rest
of mankind? And yet the owner, having hid it carefully, is
glad, because he thinks he is now sure of it. If it should be
stole, the owner, though he might live perhaps ten years
after the theft, of which he knew nothing, would find no
difference between his having or losing it, for both ways it
was equally useless to him.
‘Among those foolish pursuers of pleasure they reckon
all that delight in hunting, in fowling, or gaming, of
whose madness they have only heard, for they have no
such things among them. But they have asked us, ‘What
sort of pleasure is it that men can find in throwing the
dice?’ (for if there were any pleasure in it, they think the
doing it so often should give one a surfeit of it); ‘and what
pleasure can one find in hearing the barking and howling
of dogs, which seem rather odious than pleasant sounds?’
Nor can they comprehend the pleasure of seeing dogs run
after a hare, more than of seeing one dog run after
another; for if the seeing them run is that which gives the
pleasure, you have the same entertainment to the eye on
both these occasions, since that is the same in both cases. But if the pleasure lies in seeing the hare killed and torn by
the dogs, this ought rather to stir pity, that a weak,
harmless, and fearful hare should be devoured by strong,
fierce, and cruel dogs. Therefore all this business of
hunting is, among the Utopians, turned over to their
butchers, and those, as has been already said, are all slaves,
and they look on hunting as one of the basest parts of a
butcher’s work, for they account it both more profitable
and more decent to kill those beasts that are more
necessary and useful to mankind, whereas the killing and
tearing of so small and miserable an animal can only attract
the huntsman with a false show of pleasure, from which
he can reap but small advantage. They look on the desire
of the bloodshed, even of beasts, as a mark of a mind that
is already corrupted with cruelty, or that at least, by too
frequent returns of so brutal a pleasure, must degenerate
into it.
‘Thus though the rabble of mankind look upon these,
and on innumerable other things of the same nature, as
pleasures, the Utopians, on the contrary, observing that
there is nothing in them truly pleasant, conclude that they
are not to be reckoned among pleasures; for though these
things may create some tickling in the senses (which seems
to be a true notion of pleasure), yet they imagine that this does not arise from the thing itself, but from a depraved
custom, which may so vitiate a man’s taste that bitter
things may pass for sweet, as women with child think
pitch or tallow taste sweeter than honey; but as a man’s
sense, when corrupted either by a disease or some ill
habit., does not change the nature of other things, so
neither can it change the nature of pleasure.
‘They reckon up several sorts of pleasures, which they
call true ones; some belong to the body, and others to the
mind. The pleasures of the mind lie in knowledge, and in
that delight which the contemplation of truth carries with
it; to which they add the joyful reflections on a well-spent
life, and the assured hopes of a future happiness. They
divide the pleasures of the body into two sorts—the one is
that which gives our senses some real delight, and is
performed either by recruiting Nature and supplying those
parts which feed the internal heat of life by eating and
drinking, or when Nature is eased of any surcharge that
oppresses it, when we are relieved from sudden pain, or
that which arises from satisfying the appetite which Nature
has wisely given to lead us to the propagation of the
species. There is another kind of pleasure that arises
neither from our receiving what the body requires, nor its
being relieved when overcharged, and yet, by a secret unseen virtue, affects the senses, raises the passions, and
strikes the mind with generous impressions—this is, the
pleasure that arises from music. Another kind of bodily
pleasure is that which results from an undisturbed and
vigorous constitution of body, when life and active spirits
seem to actuate every part. This lively health, when
entirely free from all mixture of pain, of itself gives an
inward pleasure, independent of all external objects of
delight; and though this pleasure does not so powerfully
affect us, nor act so strongly on the senses as some of the
others, yet it may be esteemed as the greatest of all
pleasures; and almost all the Utopians reckon it the
foundation and basis of all the other joys of life, since this
alone makes the state of life easy and desirable, and when
this is wanting, a man is really capable of no other
pleasure. They look upon freedom from pain, if it does
not rise from perfect health, to be a state of stupidity rather
than of pleasure. This subject has been very narrowly
canvassed among them, and it has been debated whether a
firm and entire health could be called a pleasure or not.
Some have thought that there was no pleasure but what
was ‘excited’ by some sensible motion in the body. But
this opinion has been long ago excluded from among
them; so that now they almost universally agree that health is the greatest of all bodily pleasures; and that as there is a
pain in sickness which is as opposite in its nature to
pleasure as sickness itself is to health, so they hold that
health is accompanied with pleasure. And if any should say
that sickness is not really pain, but that it only carries pain
along with it, they look upon that as a fetch of subtlety
that does not much alter the matter. It is all one, in their
opinion, whether it be said that health is in itself a
pleasure, or that it begets a pleasure, as fire gives heat, so it
be granted that all those whose health is entire have a true
pleasure in the enjoyment of it. And they reason thus:-
‘What is the pleasure of eating, but that a man’s health,
which had been weakened, does, with the assistance of
food, drive away hunger, and so recruiting itself, recovers
its former vigour? And being thus refreshed it finds a
pleasure in that conflict; and if the conflict is pleasure, the
victory must yet breed a greater pleasure, except we fancy
that it becomes stupid as soon as it has obtained that which
it pursued, and so neither knows nor rejoices in its own
welfare.’ If it is said that health cannot be felt, they
absolutely deny it; for what man is in health, that does not
perceive it when he is awake? Is there any man that is so
dull and stupid as not to acknowledge that he feels a delight in health? And what is delight but another name
for pleasure?
‘But, of all pleasures, they esteem those to be most
valuable that lie in the mind, the chief of which arise out
of true virtue and the witness of a good conscience. They
account health the chief pleasure that belongs to the body;
for they think that the pleasure of eating and drinking, and
all the other delights of sense, are only so far desirable as
they give or maintain health; but they are not pleasant in
themselves otherwise than as they resist those impressions
that our natural infirmities are still making upon us. For as
a wise man desires rather to avoid diseases than to take
physic, and to be freed from pain rather than to find ease
by remedies, so it is more desirable not to need this sort of
pleasure than to be obliged to indulge it. If any man
imagines that there is a real happiness in these enjoyments,
he must then confess that he would be the happiest of all
men if he were to lead his life in perpetual hunger, thirst,
and itching, and, by consequence, in perpetual eating,
drinking, and scratching himself; which any one may easily
see would be not only a base, but a miserable, state of a
life. These are, indeed, the lowest of pleasures, and the
least pure, for we can never relish them but when they are
mixed with the contrary pains. The pain of hunger must give us the pleasure of eating, and here the pain outbalances
the pleasure. And as the pain is more vehement,
so it lasts much longer; for as it begins before the pleasure,
so it does not cease but with the pleasure that extinguishes
it, and both expire together. They think, therefore, none
of those pleasures are to be valued any further than as they
are necessary; yet they rejoice in them, and with due
gratitude acknowledge the tenderness of the great Author
of Nature, who has planted in us appetites, by which those
things that are necessary for our preservation are likewise
made pleasant to us. For how miserable a thing would life
be if those daily diseases of hunger and thirst were to be
carried off by such bitter drugs as we must use for those
diseases that return seldomer upon us! And thus these
pleasant, as well as proper, gifts of Nature maintain the
strength and the sprightliness of our bodies.
‘They also entertain themselves with the other delights
let in at their eyes, their ears, and their nostrils as the
pleasant relishes and seasoning of life, which Nature seems
to have marked out peculiarly for man, since no other sort
of animals contemplates the figure and beauty of the
universe, nor is delighted with smells any further than as
they distinguish meats by them; nor do they apprehend
the concords or discords of sound. Yet, in all pleasures whatsoever, they take care that a lesser joy does not hinder
a greater, and that pleasure may never breed pain, which
they think always follows dishonest pleasures. But they
think it madness for a man to wear out the beauty of his
face or the force of his natural strength, to corrupt the
sprightliness of his body by sloth and laziness, or to waste
it by fasting; that it is madness to weaken the strength of
his constitution and reject the other delights of life, unless
by renouncing his own satisfaction he can either serve the
public or promote the happiness of others, for which he
expects a greater recompense from God. So that they look
on such a course of life as the mark of a mind that is both
cruel to itself and ungrateful to the Author of Nature, as if
we would not be beholden to Him for His favours, and
therefore rejects all His blessings; as one who should afflict
himself for the empty shadow of virtue, or for no better
end than to render himself capable of bearing those
misfortunes which possibly will never happen.
‘This is their notion of virtue and of pleasure: they
think that no man’s reason can carry him to a truer idea of
them unless some discovery from heaven should inspire
him with sublimer notions. I have not now the leisure to
examine whether they think right or wrong in this matter;
nor do I judge it necessary, for I have only undertaken togive you an account of their constitution, but not to
defend all their principles. I am sure that whatever may be
said of their notions, there is not in the whole world either
a better people or a happier government. Their bodies are
vigorous and lively; and though they are but of a middle
stature, and have neither the fruitfullest soil nor the purest
air in the world; yet they fortify themselves so well, by
their temperate course of life, against the unhealthiness of
their air, and by their industry they so cultivate their soil,
that there is nowhere to be seen a greater increase, both of
corn and cattle, nor are there anywhere healthier men and
freer from diseases; for one may there see reduced to
practice not only all the art that the husbandman employs
in manuring and improving an ill soil, but whole woods
plucked up by the roots, and in other places new ones
planted, where there were none before. Their principal
motive for this is the convenience of carriage, that their
timber may be either near their towns or growing on the
banks of the sea, or of some rivers, so as to be floated to
them; for it is a harder work to carry wood at any distance
over land than corn. The people are industrious, apt to
learn, as well as cheerful and pleasant, and none can
endure more labour when it is necessary; but, except in
that case, they love their ease.